Hello everyone, I'm Kong Ling Jie. Let's start the class. Today we are going to do a program on software design. What we are going to do today is an introduction. Let's start. As the first class of a software design program, we are going to introduce the basic concept of software design. Then we will start using the language C++ we want to use to write some programs. And through these example programs, we will introduce some of the most basic concepts. Including how I can write some basic statements and present the output of the operation. And how can I let users interact with the program so that it can input some information to the program. And how can I write the program to make a basic judgment or operation or repeat operation. Finally, I will talk about something that is a little boring. Okay, this class is to teach you how to design a computer program. Let's talk about what it is. What is a computer program? Basically, it is the original component of the computer. So many times we call it software. Compared to the hardware that we can see and touch, software is usually more abstract. Our task in this class is to let everyone know what software is what program. So there is a definition like this. If I can structure a combination of information and instructions, then through this combination, if I can let the computer produce a goal I want, then this is called a program. In other words, the point here is that what we are doing is to combine information and instructions. I give the computer some materials that can let it run and tell it what to calculate and how to calculate. Then this is the design of the program. This is a computer program. The reason for writing programs is obvious. Because computers run faster. Because computers have a lot of memory, we humans can't do it. The disadvantage so far is that at least so far, computers don't know what they are doing. Humans must tell the computer what to do. So humans, or the so-called urban designers, programmers, their task is to tell the computer, please do this, please do that. This is the task of humans. How do humans and computers talk? Just like we talk to Americans, we may have to speak Japanese, and we have to speak Japanese to Japanese. If I want to talk to the computer, I have to speak the computer and understand it. That is the so-called programming language. Writing or speaking programming language is basically a line by line. You write down the code of the city and then form our computer city. Then run a program. Sometimes it's called running a program. Sometimes it's called executing the program. It's basically a line by line. You execute our instructions and hopefully, you finally achieve the goal that we originally wanted to achieve. Urban language, let's introduce it a little more. People talk to computers, which means they want to talk to computers and understand them. So that's urban language. Urban language is divided into at least three categories. So-called machine language, combination language, and high-level language. Machine language and combination language. These two languages are basically directly controlled by hardware. So according to different types of hardware, such as Windows, Mac, these things, I'm sorry, I said wrong, PC or Mac. If the hardware structure is different, the combination language and machine language you need are different. Different brand CPU, different architecture CPU, may need different things. It's the same, it's the same. Not to mention if you're in the fridge today, air conditioner, plane, or something, it's all different. We usually don't do this. We usually write high-level language. There are many reasons for this. One is that it's usually difficult for us to learn these machine speaking methods. We don't need everyone to directly control the machine. We should write something that is easier to write. Then we can use the so-called translator to help us turn it into something that the machine can understand. So in this course, we also write so-called high-level language. High-level language is easier to understand and easier to write. After writing it, find a so-called translator to turn it into machine or combination language. So most of the application software of this era is written in high-level language. The C++ we're going to learn in this course is high-level language. In addition, you can almost call out names like Python, Java, PHP, Objective-C, R, etc. These people are all high-level languages. In our field, there is basically no chance to write low-level language. Basically, we don't directly control the hardware. We are all the main software. So it's pretty normal for us to write high-level language. So who is going to do the work of this translator? In the world of C++, we use something called compiler. This is called a compiler. Editing, translation, those two words. Then the compiler will help us to turn the C++ we wrote into assembly language or even machine language. Then some other languages use the so-called interpreter. That is, a translator. For example, Python uses the interpreter. There are some differences between them, but don't care too much. Anyway, our course teaches you to write C++, which is to teach you to use compiler. After a long time, you will naturally know the difference between compiler and interpreter. I won't do more introduction today. So C++ programming language is basically a very powerful thing. It was developed in the so-called AT&T Bell Lab around 1979. In history, many programming languages have been invented. If you have heard of a language called C, there is a language called C++, you will think that the latter and the former seem to have something to do with it, right? It's not wrong. C++ was developed from C languages. Since C++ is added from C languages, what is the difference? We usually like to say that C languages are a procedural programming language. That is, the so-called procedural language. What it means is that what I do today is to write one procedure. A procedure will solve a small task. If you put a lot of procedures together, you can solve a big task. C++ is an object-oriented programming language. We say it is an object-oriented program. What is the concept of object-oriented programming? It probably means that in the program I want to write, we imagine a lot of entities. Each entity is an object. So I write a program to build a lot of objects and define how they interact with each other. It's like this. It's too abstract now. If you have never learned programming, you probably don't know what I'm talking about. So don't mind. Our class will start with the foundation of C++. So what we actually taught before is 98% similar to C languages. You can also declare that you will write C after you learn C++. You can spend a little more time to make up for the differences. It's okay. This semester, most of the time will be spent on procedural. Help you build the foundation. So the principle of object-oriented is in the current course design of the capital system. It's mainly spent under the general idea. So this semester, we will introduce OOP a little bit, but not very deeply. It's probably like this. So, in general, C++ is to add the function of object-oriented. Why do we do this? The main reason is that we hope that when writing a poem, we can have a group of people who spend a long time to develop a large group system. This is actually what happens in the so-called commercial information system. You don't expect a system to be used for a few years. So it will definitely be used for a long time. So the staff in such a system will inevitably flow. So people are a big problem. The system is usually large in size. It takes a long time to develop. So the cooperation between each other must have some programming language functions to assist. C language is lacking this kind of thing, and C++ is more. Or the concept of object-oriented is to make up for this. So this is why we should teach C++ in this course. Because most of the students in the capital system will have a chance to write a information system after graduation. Have a chance to write commercial information system. So in this case, knowing the concept of object-oriented is very important. So in this class, it is set to make you learn these things. So C++ is necessary. This is my personal opinion. I think C++ or OOP is something that everyone must learn. For everyone, it may be a little too early to learn now. Because everyone doesn't have a lot of food experience yet. But you must have this concept now. So C++ is basically a superset of C. Most C languages can be handled by C++ compiler. So learning C++ is like learning C. So who should learn C++? If you want to become a computer scientist or a computer engineer, you should learn a language that is hard enough, and fundamental enough. So learning C or C++ is a good choice. Or if you want to know the details of the program, especially the system level details, learning C or C++ is very useful. There are many languages that are easier to learn now, such as Java. Even better to learn, like Python, Arma, etc. Easier to learn, easier to get started, usually there is a disadvantage that it is relatively easy to learn, and you don't have to pay attention to the system details. So if you want to be efficient, writing C or C++ is often faster than what I just said. So whether you need it or not is up to you. You can also write some calculations that don't need to deal with a lot of data. You can also have your website only for 30 people, not for 30,000 people. This is up to you. Because you may not need it. But since it is teaching, we have to teach a little deeper. Our expectation of C++ students is that they need to have a strong program design. Maybe not as strong as C++, this is a bit too exaggerated. But in the university of Taiwan, besides C++, it should be the strongest. This is my personal expectation. OK, finally, if you want to be able to learn other languages easily in the future, then learning C++ is also very good. Because C++ not only has the so-called system-based language, it also has the OOP part. If you can only choose one language, I can't find a better language for this class that is more suitable than C++. Language itself is not the point, but language is the media of learning. So we always have to pick a language to go to the program design. After you finish it, you may not really write C++, but the concept here will make it easier for you to learn other languages. This will achieve the goal.