好,大家好,我是孔林傑,那我們呢就來上課吧。今天要跟大家上的課程呢是城市設計,那麼我們今天要做的事情就是一個introduction。好,開始。 那麼呢,作為一個程式設計的課程的第一個禮拜的第一堂課,我們要先跟大家介紹什麼是基本的程式設計的概念。接著我們就會開始使用我們要用的語言C++來寫一些程式,並且透過這一些example program,我們來跟大家做一些最基本的概念的介紹,包括我如何能夠寫一些基本的statement,並且把東西印在把運算的結果呈現出來,以及我如何能夠讓使用者跟程式互動,讓它可以輸入一些資料給程式,以及我如何能夠寫程式做基本的這個判斷或者是運算或者是重複運算。最後會講一點排版的東西。 好,那我們這門課呢是要教大家程式設計computer programming,那我們來講一下它是什麼吧。什麼是computer program?程式是什麼?基本上就是電腦裡面運作的元件,那麼呢,很多時候我們也稱呼它為軟體啦,相當相對於看得見摸得著的那一些硬體，軟體通常是顯的比較抽象，那我們這門課的任務就是讓大家知道何謂軟體,何謂程式。那麼呢,有一個定義是這個樣子。 如果我能結構化的組合資料和指令的話，那麼呢，透過這個組合，如果我能讓電腦產生某一個我想要的目標，那麼這樣就叫做一個程式，也就是說呢，這裡的重點就是我們在做的事情是把資料和指令組合起來。我給電腦一些可以讓它運算的素材，並且告訴它要算什麼，要怎麼算，然後這樣子就是程式設計啦，這樣就是一個電腦程式。 那麼呢，寫程式的理由就很明顯啊，因為電腦跑的比較快嘛，因為電腦有大量的這個記憶體，那我們人呢，基本上是做不到的。那目前為止的缺點，至少目前為止，電腦不知道自己要做什麼，人必須告訴電腦要幹嘛。所以人，或者說就是所謂的程式設計師programmer，它的任務就是要告訴電腦說，誒，請你這樣做，請你那樣做，那這是人的任務。 那人跟電腦怎麼講話呢？就像我們跟美國人講話可能要說美語，跟日本人講話要說日文。我要跟電腦講話，就要講電腦聽得懂的話，那就是所謂的程式語言了，programming language。寫程式語言或者是講程式語言呢，基本上就是一行一行你把程式碼寫下來，然後來組成我們的電腦程式。 那麼執行一個program，有時候叫running a program，有時候叫executing the program。它基本上就是一行一行地執行我們的指令，並且hopefully，最後有達到我們原本要達到的目標。 程式語言這種東西，那我們來稍微再多介紹一點。人跟電腦講話，就是要講電腦聽得懂的話，所以那就是程式語言。那麼程式語言分為至少三大類，所謂的機器語言，組合語言和高階語言。 好。 機器語言和組合語言，這兩種語言呢，它們基本上都是直接控制硬體的。所以根據不同形態的硬體，比如說Windows啦，Mac啦，這些東西。哦，應該對不起，我說錯了，PC或者是Mac。它們呢，硬體的結構如果不一樣，那你需要的組合語言和機器語言就不一樣。不同廠牌的CPU，不同架構的CPU，需要的可能也不一樣。諸如此類的，那更不用說你今天如果是冰箱啊，冷氣啊，飛機啊什麼的，都不一樣。 那我們通常不會做這件事情，我們通常會去寫高階語言，那這有很多理由啦。一來就是，通常我們人在學這些機器講話的方式的時候呢，都很困難。那我們也不需要每一個人，都去直接控制機器吧。我們應該去寫一些比較容易寫的東西，然後靠著所謂的translator來幫我們把它轉成機器看得懂的東西就好了。好，所以在這門課裡，我們也是寫所謂的高階語言。高階語言呢，比較容易懂，然後呢，也比較容易寫。寫出來了以後呢，找一個所謂的translator，把它轉成機器或組合語言即可。 那麼絕大部分這年代的application software都是用高階語言寫的。那我們這門課要學的C++是高階語言。另外許許多多你幾乎你叫得出名字的什麼Python啊，Java，PHP，Objective-C，R等等。這些人都是高階語言。那在我們的這個領域裡面，基本上也沒有什麼寫低階語言的機會啦，基本上我們不會去直接控制硬體。我們都是主攻軟體這一塊嘛，那麼我們寫高階語言算是蠻正常的。 那麼到底誰來做這個translator的工作呢？在C++的世界裡，我們使用一種叫做compiler的東西。這叫做編譯器。編輯翻譯，那兩字。那麼編譯器呢，就會幫我們把我們寫的C++程式轉成assembly language或者是甚至是machine language。 那麼有一些其他的語言用的是所謂的interpreter，就是直譯器。那比如說Python這種東西，用它寫的程式就是interpreter。那它們中間有一些區別，不過也不用太在意。反正我們這門課呢，就是教你寫C++。就是教你用compiler。那日子慢慢久了以後，大家自然而然會知道compiler跟interpreter有什麼差別。今天呢，就不多做介紹。 那麼C++的程式語言呢，它基本上是一個很powerful的東西。它呢是在1979年左右在所謂的AT&T的Bell Lab這個被開發出來的。那歷史上這個有許許多多的程式語言都曾經被發明過。那麼大家如果聽說過有一個語言叫C，有一個語言叫C++，多多少少會覺得後者跟前者，這兩個好像有點關係，對吧？也沒有錯，C++是從C語言開發出來的。 那麼C++既然是從C語言這個加東西進去的，那差別在哪呢？我們通常喜歡說C語言是一個procedural的programming language，也就是所謂的程序式的程式程序式的語言。那麼它的意思大概就是說，我今天要寫程式，我做的事情是寫一個一個的procedure。一個procedure會解決一個解決一個小任務。然後我把許多的procedure組在一起的話，就可以解決大任務。 好。 那麼呢，C++則是一個所謂的object-oriented的programming language。那我們說它是物件導向的程式。那麼物件導向又是什麼概念呢？它大概的意思是說，我想寫的程式裡面，我們呢想像有許多的entity，每一個entity就是一個物件。所以我寫程式是建立許多的物件，並且定義它們之間會怎麼互動。是這樣子感覺。那現在講起來都還是太抽象了。如果你從來沒有學過程式的話，應該不知道我在說什麼。所以也不要太在意。我們這門課呢會從C++的基礎開始教。所以前面事實上教的東西跟C語言有98%都很像。 所以你也可以宣稱你學完C++了以後就會寫C。你再稍微多花一點點時間，去把差別的部分補起來就好了。是可以的。我們這學期呢，大概這個絕大部分的時間都會花在procedural的這部分，幫大家把基礎打好。那麼object-oriented的部分呢，原則上在現在的資管系的課程設計裡面，它是放在大家大一下的時間，為主。所以我們這學期呢，就會稍微地介紹到OOP，但是不會很深入地講。大概是這個樣子。 那麼呢，C++大體上來說就是把物件導向的功能加進去嘛。到底為什麼要做這件事情呢？主要的原因是，我們希望在寫程式的時候呢，可以有一群人，他們花很長的時間去開發大型的軟體系統。這事實上就是所謂的商用資訊系統通常發生的事。你不會期待某一套系統只用幾年就用完，所以它一定會長期地用下去。 那麼這樣子的系統裡面的人員不免會流動，所以人是一個很大的問題。那系統一般來說規模也龐大，開發起來又要很久。因此彼此的協作，彼此的合作必須要有一些程式語言本身的功能可以來輔助。C語言比較缺乏這種東西，而C++比較有。或者說物件導向的概念就是補這個。所以這就是為什麼我們這門課應該要教C++，因為大部分資管系的同學畢業了以後呢，就是會有機會要寫資訊系統。 有機會要寫商用資訊系統。所以在這個情況下呢，知道物件導向的概念是很重要的。 好，所以呢，在系上這些課就是被設定成必須要讓你學會這些東西。所以呢，C++是必要的。這是我個人的看法。我認為C++，或是OP的部分，是大家必須要學的。對大家來說呢，現在學可能多少有點太早，因為大家還沒有很多的食物經驗。但你現在一定要有這個概念才行。 所以呢，C++基本上你可以說它是C的supersets啦。大部分的C語言都可以被這個C++的compiler來處理。所以呢，學了C++就像是學了C一樣啦。 那麼誰應該學C++呢？如果你想要變成電腦科學家或者是電腦工程師，你應該要學夠難的夠fundamental的程式語言。C或C++是你的很好的選擇。又或者是，如果你希望知道program的detail，特別是系統level的detail的話，學C或C++是非常的有用。現在有很多比較容易學的語言，像是Java，那甚至像是更好學的像是Python啦，R啦之類的。 比較容易學，比較容易上手，通常就有一個缺點，就是它比較不重視系統方面的細節。所以如果要比效率的話，很多時候寫C或C++的效率會比剛剛講的東西都快很多。那需不需要其實是見仁見智啦。你也可以一輩子就是寫一些不需要處理非常大量資料的運算。你也可以一輩子就是你的網頁只能30個人上，不能3萬個人上。這個是看情況，因為你有可能確實是用的不到。不過既然是教學，我們就是要教得深入一點。我們對資管系同學的期待就是，它就是程式設計要很強。可能不能說有比資工系的強，這有點太誇張了，但是絕對要在台大裡面除了資工以外，就是應該要是最強的。這是我個人的期望。好，那最後呢，如果你希望將來可以很輕鬆地學習其他的語言的話，那學C++也是非常好的。因為C++不但有C語言的所謂的比較系統面的東西，它還有OP的這部分。如果你只能挑一個語言的話，我現在確實找不到比C++更合適的作為這一門課的語言，這樣子。語言本身不是重點，但是語言是學習的媒介。所以呢，我們總是要挑一個語言來上程式設計。上完了以後，你將來未必真的寫C++，但是這裡的觀念會讓你學其他的語言比較容易，這樣就實現目標了。 好的。
Okay, everyone, I'm Kong Lin-chieh. Let's start the class. The course we're going to cover today is programming. So, what we're going to do today is an introduction. All right, let's begin. So, as the first week's first class of a programming course, we'll first introduce to everyone what the basic concepts of programming are. Then, we will start using the language we're going to use, C++, to write some programs. And through these example programs, we will introduce some of the most basic concepts, including how I can write some basic statements and display the results of calculations, and how I can make the user interact with the program, allowing them to input some data into the program. Also, how I can write programs to perform basic judgments, or calculations, or repetitive calculations. Lastly, I'll talk a bit about formatting. Okay, this course is about teaching everyone computer programming. So let's talk about what it is. What is a computer program? What is a program? Basically, it's the components that operate inside a computer. And many times, we also refer to it as software. Compared to tangible hardware, software is usually more abstract. And the task of this course is to let everyone know what software is, what a program is. So, there's a definition that goes like this: If I can structurally combine data and instructions, then, through this combination, if I can make the computer produce a certain desired goal, then that is called a program. In other words, the key point here is that what we are doing is combining data and instructions. I give the computer some materials that it can use for computation, and tell it what to calculate and how to calculate it. And that's programming, that's a computer program. So, the reason for writing programs is obvious: computers run faster. Because computers have a large amount of memory, which we humans generally can't do. And the current drawback, at least for now, is that computers don't know what they need to do. Humans must tell the computer what to do. So, humans, or what we call programmers, their task is to tell the computer, "Please do this, please do that." That's the human's job. So, how do humans talk to computers? Just like when we talk to Americans, we might need to speak English, and when we talk to Japanese people, we need to speak Japanese. When I talk to a computer, I need to speak a language that the computer understands, and that's what we call a programming language. Writing a programming language or speaking a programming language basically means you write the code line by line, and then it forms our computer program. So, executing a program, sometimes called "running a program," sometimes called "executing the program." It basically means executing our instructions line by line, and hopefully, finally achieving the goal we originally intended. As for programming languages, let's introduce them a bit more. When humans talk to computers, they need to speak in a language that computers understand, so that's a programming language. Programming languages are divided into at least three main categories: machine language, assembly language, and high-level language. Okay. Machine language and assembly language, these two types of languages basically directly control hardware. So, depending on different types of hardware, for example, Windows, Mac, these things. Oh, sorry, I made a mistake, PC or Mac. If their hardware structures are different, then the assembly language and machine language you need will also be different. Different brands of CPUs, different architectures of CPUs, may also require different things. And so on. Not to mention if you are talking about refrigerators, air conditioners, airplanes, or whatever, they are all different. We usually don't do this. We usually write high-level languages. There are many reasons for this. One is that it's usually very difficult for us humans to learn how these machines speak. And we don't need everyone to directly control machines, do we? We should write things that are easier to write, and then rely on what is called a translator to help us convert it into something the machine understands. So, in this course, we also write what is called a high-level language. High-level languages are easier to understand, and easier to write. After writing it, we find a so-called translator to convert it into machine or assembly language, and that's it. Most application software nowadays is written in high-level languages. And the C++ we're going to learn in this course is a high-level language. Many, many other languages that you can almost name, like Python, Java, PHP, Objective-C, R, etc., these are all high-level languages. And in our field, there's basically no opportunity to write low-level languages. We basically don't directly control hardware. We mostly focus on software. So, writing high-level languages is quite normal. So, who actually does the job of this translator? In the world of C++, we use something called a compiler. This is called a "bian yi qi" (compiler). "bian ji" (edit) and "fan yi" (translate), those two words. So, the compiler will help us translate the C++ program we wrote into assembly language or even machine language. Now, some other languages use what's called an interpreter. That's an "zhi yi qi" (interpreter). For example, Python and similar languages, programs written with them use an interpreter. There are some differences between them, but you don't need to worry too much about it. In any case, this course teaches you to write C++. It teaches you to use a compiler. And as time goes on, you will naturally learn the differences between a compiler and an interpreter. Today, I won't go into too much detail. So, the C++ programming language is basically a very powerful thing. It was developed around 1979 at what was then called AT&T Bell Labs. Historically, many, many programming languages have been invented. And if you've heard of a language called C, and a language called C++, you might have a vague feeling that there's some connection between the latter and the former, right? You're not wrong, C++ was developed from the C language. So, since C++ adds things to the C language, what's the difference? We usually say that the C language is a procedural programming language, which means a procedural language. So, its meaning is probably that when I want to write a program today, what I do is write one procedure after another. One procedure will solve a small task. And if I combine many procedures, I can solve a large task. Okay. So, C++ is a so-called object-oriented programming language. We call it an object-oriented program. So, what is the concept of object-oriented programming? Its general meaning is that, in the program I want to write, we imagine there are many entities, and each entity is an object. So, when I write a program, I'm creating many objects and defining how they will interact with each other. That's the feeling. It still sounds too abstract now. If you've never learned programming, you probably don't know what I'm talking about. So don't worry about it. In this course, we will start by teaching the basics of C++. So, in fact, what is taught at the beginning is 98% similar to the C language. So you can also claim that after learning C++, you will be able to write C. You just need to spend a little more time to fill in the differences, and that's fine. It's doable. In this semester, we will spend most of our time on the procedural part, helping everyone build a solid foundation. As for the object-oriented part, in principle, in the current curriculum design of information management departments, it is placed in the first year of university, with a focus on the latter half of the year. So, in this semester, we will briefly introduce OOP, but we will not go into it in depth. That's roughly how it is. So, generally speaking, C++ essentially adds object-oriented features. Why do we do this? The main reason is that we hope that when writing programs, there can be a group of people who spend a long time developing large software systems. This is actually what usually happens with commercial information systems. You wouldn't expect a system to be used for only a few years and then be discarded, so it will definitely be used for a long time. So, the personnel in such systems will inevitably change, so people are a big problem. Generally speaking, systems are also large in scale and take a long time to develop. Therefore, mutual collaboration and cooperation must have some functions of the programming language itself to assist. The C language is relatively lacking in such things, while C++ has more. Or, the concept of object-oriented programming is to make up for this. So, this is why we should teach C++ in this course, because most students in information management departments, after graduation, will have the opportunity to write information systems. They will have the opportunity to write commercial information systems. So, in this situation, knowing the concept of object-oriented programming is very important. So, in the department, these courses are set up so that you must learn these things. Therefore, C++ is necessary. This is my personal opinion. I think C++, or the OOP part, is something everyone must learn. For everyone, learning it now might be a bit too early, because you don't have much practical experience yet. But you must have this concept now. So, C++ is basically, you can say it's a superset of C. Most C language can be processed by the C++ compiler. So, learning C++ is like learning C. So, who should learn C++? If you want to become a computer scientist or a computer engineer, you should learn a sufficiently difficult, sufficiently fundamental programming language. C or C++ is a good choice for you. Or, if you want to know the details of a program, especially the system-level details, then learning C or C++ is very useful. There are now many easier-to-learn languages, such as Java, and even easier ones like Python, R, and so on. They are easier to learn and get started with, but they usually have a drawback: they don't focus as much on system-level details. So, if you want to compare efficiency, writing C or C++ is often much faster than the things I just mentioned. As for whether you need it, it's really up to personal preference. You can also spend your whole life writing calculations that don't need to process a huge amount of data. You can also spend your whole life with your website only accommodating 30 people, not 30,000. This depends on the situation, because you might genuinely not need it. However, since it's teaching, we need to teach it in more depth. Our expectation for students in the Information Management Department is that their programming skills should be very strong. Maybe not stronger than those in Computer Science, that's a bit exaggerated, but they should definitely be the strongest among all departments at National Taiwan University except Computer Science. This is my personal expectation. Okay, and finally, if you hope to easily learn other languages in the future, then learning C++ is also excellent. This is because C++ not only has the more system-oriented aspects of the C language, but it also has the OOP part. If you can only choose one language, I truly cannot find a more suitable language than C++ to be the language for this course, like that. The language itself isn't the key, but the language is the medium for learning. So, we always have to pick a language to teach programming. After finishing this course, you may not actually write C++ in the future, but the concepts here will make it easier for you to learn other languages, and that achieves the goal. Okay.